.\" The version in the .TH line below is kept in sync with Cargo.toml
.\" by build.rs; edit the crate version, not this string.  The date is
.\" a hand-maintained release date.
.TH HYPERSHUNT 1 "2026-06-15" "hypershunt 1.0.0-rc16" "User Commands"
.
.SH NAME
hypershunt \- HTTP server and reverse proxy
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hypershunt
.RB [ \-c | \-\-config
.IR file ]
.RB [ \-\-check\-config ]
.br
.B hypershunt
.BR \-\-version | \-\-help
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hypershunt
is a lightweight HTTP/HTTPS server and reverse proxy.
It supports virtual host routing, automatic TLS via Let\(aqs Encrypt,
static file serving, HTTP redirects, configurable timeouts, and
ES256 JWT session authentication.
.PP
Configuration is read from a KDL file (default:
.I hypershunt.kdl
in the working directory).
All sockets are bound before privileges are dropped, so
.B hypershunt
can be started as root to bind ports 80 and 443 and will then switch
to an unprivileged user as specified in the configuration.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-c " file" ", " \-\-config " file"
Read configuration from
.I file
instead of the default
.IR hypershunt.kdl .
.TP
.B \-\-check\-config
Parse and validate the configuration, then exit without binding any
sockets.
Exits 0 on success, or non-zero with diagnostics on standard error if
the configuration has parse or semantic errors.
Useful for CI and as a pre-flight check before sending
.B SIGHUP
to hot-reload a running instance.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a usage summary and exit.
Use
.B \-\-help
for the full description and
.B \-h
for the short form.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print the version and exit.
.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Configuration is written in KDL.
The top-level nodes are:
.PP
.RS 4
.TP
.B server
Global settings: privilege drop user/group, state directory for ACME
certificates and JWT signing keys, authentication back-end, and global
TLS defaults.
.TP
.B listener
Opens a TCP, UDP (HTTP/3), or Unix socket (via
.B bind
or an inherited file descriptor via
.BR fd )
and begins accepting connections.
Each listener optionally has a
.B tls
child (self-signed, PEM file, or ACME/Let\(aqs Encrypt)
and a
.B timeouts
child.
By default a listener serves every defined virtual host.
Add one or more
.B vhost
reference children to serve only a chosen subset (different sets of
virtual hosts on different ports).
.TP
.B vhost
Maps one or more hostnames to URL routing rules.
Names are matched against the
.B Host
request header; a leading
.B ~
treats the name as a regular expression.
.TP
.B location
Maps a URL path prefix to a handler:
.BR static ,
.BR proxy ,
.BR redirect ,
.BR respond ,
.BR fastcgi ,
.BR scgi ,
.BR cgi ,
.BR status ,
or
.BR auth\-request .
.RE
.PP
See the configuration reference for the full directive list:
.UR https://github.com/MichaelPaddon/hypershunt/blob/main/docs/reference.md
.UE
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/hypershunt.kdl
Default system-wide configuration file when
.B hypershunt
is installed as a service.
.TP
.I /var/lib/hypershunt/
Default state directory for ACME account keys, issued certificates,
and JWT signing keys (set via
.B server state\-dir
in the configuration).
The JWT EC private key is stored at
.I /var/lib/hypershunt/jwt/ec\-key.pem
and generated on first startup with mode 0600.
.TP
.I /var/www/hypershunt/
Default document root served by the packaged configuration.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B RUST_LOG
Controls log verbosity.
The default is
.BR hypershunt=info .
Examples:
.BR hypershunt=debug ,
.BR hypershunt=trace .
See
.UR https://docs.rs/tracing\-subscriber/latest/tracing_subscriber/filter/struct.EnvFilter.html
.UE
for the full filter syntax.
.
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.BR SIGINT ", " SIGTERM
Initiates graceful shutdown.
Listening sockets stop accepting new connections; in-flight requests are
given up to 30 seconds to complete before the process exits.
.TP
.B SIGHUP
Hot-reloads the configuration from the same path given at startup.
Routing (vhosts, locations, handlers, header rules, access policies,
rate limits), the listener set (listeners are added or drained), and
named TLS certificates are applied atomically; on any parse or bind
error the running configuration is left serving unchanged.
Changes to the authentication back-end are refused with a logged
warning and require a restart.
.TP
.B SIGUSR2
Performs a seamless binary upgrade: re-execs the on-disk
.B hypershunt
binary, handing the inherited listening sockets to the new process so
no connections are dropped across the swap.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
Start with the default configuration file in the current directory:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
hypershunt
.EE
.RE
.PP
Start with an explicit configuration file:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
hypershunt \-\-config /etc/hypershunt.kdl
.EE
.RE
.PP
Run with debug logging enabled:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
RUST_LOG=hypershunt=debug hypershunt \-\-config /etc/hypershunt.kdl
.EE
.RE
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR systemctl (1)
.PP
Documentation:
.UR https://github.com/MichaelPaddon/hypershunt/tree/main/docs
.UE
.RB ( quickstart.md ", " guide.md ", " reference.md ", " grammar.md ).
.
.SH BUGS
HAProxy PROXY protocol over QUIC is not supported; the wire format
is still an IETF draft.  Terminate QUIC at HAProxy and forward
HTTP/1.1 or HTTP/2 over TCP to hypershunt if source-IP preservation on
HTTP/3 traffic is required.
.
.SH AUTHOR
Michael Paddon
